+ **DHT:** Dihydrotestosterone is an endogenous androgen sex steroid and hormone
+ **E2:** Estradiol (E2), also spelled oestradiol, is an estrogen steroid hormone and the major female sex hormone
+ **P4:**  Progesterone (P4) is an endogenous steroid and progestogen sex hormone involved in the menstrual cycle, pregnancy, and embryogenesis of humans and other species

**General notes**
* The aim is to find out if the tumor is responding to a specific hormone. This response is "induced" in mice by treating them with the hormone. In humans we try to find similar expression patterns to determine if the tumor is driven by a certain hormone. In which case we can group such tumors together for more targeted and better treatment. We know that the patients have a certain type of cancer and this is recorded somewhere although we don't have this information now. If we discover a clear clustering, then it will be valuable to see which cancer types each data point (patient) has. If we interpret each cluster as being certain type of cancer instead of a hormone response, then we will misinterpret the results since the genetic expressions (features) are not results
* [Patient derived xenograft, Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patient_derived_xenograft)
* [Few useful things to know about ML](https://homes.cs.washington.edu/~pedrod/papers/cacm12.pdf)
* Useful magics:
  * `%pycat <filename>` to show a syntax-highlighted file
  * `%psource <object>` prints the source code for an object (function, for instance)

**Notes from Fabio**
* The data include: a matrix from our PDX models stimulated with different hormones (estrogen, progesterone and testosterone) - from which I estimated a list of differentially expressed genes to interrogate the patients' datasets - and a matrix from breast cancer patients retrieved from the TCGA (the Cancer Genome Atlas Consortium - published data).
* I suggest you to start testing the list of differentially expressed genes on your training data (PDXs, which is labelled with the correct treatment) that you can use as positive control in order to test the performance of your methods (you can estimate the sensitivity and specificity of the methods that you want to use, so that we can have an idea of which method should be in principle better to use in the patients dataset). Once you will be able to correctly discriminate the samples in the training set, then you can start interrogating the patients' matrix.
* Keep in mind that one of the early things that we do when dealing with sequencing data is to get rid of genes that show no or "minor" expression overall in the dataset. This means that, for those genes that do not reach a given threshold of expression in a number of patients, they are simply excluded from the analysis because they are supposedly not informative and just confounding the further analysis. Therefore, to some degree, we should expect to have differences in the genes that are expressed. 
* Regarding the patients data I already gave you they should be already normalized, whereas the new patients' dataset that you downloaded from the Internet  you should make sure it is correctly normalized (for this you should more or less have a normal distribution of your counts and more or less the samples - columns- should have a similar number of counts) and then run the analysis. However, I the interpretation of the PCA plot will not be trivial: since these are patients samples they are likely to be heterogeneous and therefore I do not expect to have a clear clustering of the samples based on their cancer type.
* [Informations about drugs used to treat breast cancer](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41573-019-00201-w) over the last decades, to give you an idea of the need for a more personalized medicine.
* [Small review on personalized medicine and why it should be pursued](https://notendur.hi.is/~vol1/pdx-papers/nejmsb1503104.pdf)
* [Patient-derived xenograft models of breast
cancer and their predictive power](https://notendur.hi.is/~vol1/pdx-papers/2015%20PDX%20Breast%20Cancer%20Research.pdf)
* [A paper from our lab in which there is the description of our PDX (Patient-Derived Xenograft) model - your training dataset](https://notendur.hi.is/~vol1/pdx-papers/2016%20MIND%20for%20Breast%20Cancer%20Sflomos%20Cancer%20Cell.pdf)